Open Babel 2.0
==============

Released on 2005-11-26.

What's new from 1.100.2
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This release represents Open Babel's fourth "birthday" and a milestone for
a stable, flexible interface for developers and users alike.

- New conversion framework. The new framework allows dynamic
   loading/unloading of file translator modules (i.e., shared
   libraries, DLLs, DSO, etc.). More importantly, it facilitates adding
   new formats, since each format is self-contained and no editing of
   other files is required.
- Improved support for XML chemistry formats, including CML, PubChem XML,
- Support for fingerprinting and calculation of Tanimoto coefficients for
   similarity consideration.
   (A flexible fingerprint framework is available for developers.)
- New support for Perl and Python "wrappers" of the Open Babel library.
- Many enhancements to the Open Babel API: See the Developers API Notes for
   more information. Some code will require updating, see the
   Developer's Migration Guide for details.
- Support for automatically reading .gz compressed files.
   (e.g., 1abc.pdb.gz is uncompressed and treated as a PDB file)
   Use of the -z flag creates gzip-compressed output files.
- Support for the new IUPAC InChI identifiers.
- Improved bond order typing, including flexible SMARTS matching in
   bondtyp.txt.
- New Kekulization routine -- improves aromaticity detection in aromatic amines
   like pyrroles, porphyrins, etc.
- Improved support for radicals and spin multiplicity, including
   assignment of hydrogens to radicals.
- Improved support for 2D vs. 3D file formats.
- New error logging framework keeps an "audit log" of changes to files
   (hydrogen addition, bond order assignment) and different levels of
   error reporting / debugging.
   Use the "---errorlevel 4" flag to access this information.
- Improved atom typing and hydrogen addition rules.
- Improved obfit utility will output RMSD and find matches with the
   best RMSD.
- Updated isotope data from 2003 IUPAC standard.
- Updated elemental data from the Blue Obelisk Data Repository.
   (project started, in part, to validate the old Open Babel data)
- Improved z-matrix code (CartesianToInternal / InternalToCartesian).
- Countless bug fixes.

New File Formats
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Import & Export:
	  ChemDraw CT (Connection Table)
	  CML Reaction files
	  MDL Molfile V3000
	  MDL Rxn files
	  Open Babel free-form fractional (crystallographic coordinates)
	  Open Babel fastsearch database format
	  Open Babel fingerprint formats
	  PCModel format
	  YASARA.org YOB format
	  Turbomole
          Improved CML support
	  Improved Gaussian 98/03 support
	  Improved SMILES import / export
-  Import-Only:
          PubChem XML
-  Export-Only:
 	  MPQC input
	  Open Babel "copy" format (i.e., copy the raw input file)
	  Sybyl MPD descriptor format
	  IUPAC InChI descriptor
-  Changed formats:
          - MMADS - eliminated
	  - bin - OpenEye binary v 1, eliminated
	  - GROMOS96 - changed from separate g96a & g96nm types to a
	    unified g96 type. Defaults to output Angstroms, Use -xn
	    to output nm.
	  - Titles - eliminated -- can be produced with SMILES -xt
