Open Babel 2.2.0
================

Released on 2008-07-04.

What's new from 2.1.1
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- New support for 3D coordinate generation using the OBBuilder class.
    Note that this code directly supports non-chiral compounds
    Stereochemistry may or may not be supported in this release
- Significantly faster force fields (up to 200x faster) and support
    for constrained optimization.
- New force fields, including complete UFF, MMFF94, and MMFF94s implementations.
- Monte Carlo conformer search support, including a new obconformer tool.
- Unified framework for plugin classes, including easy-to program file
  formats, descriptors, filters, force fields, fingerprints, etc.
- A new "descriptor" plugin framework for QSAR descriptors, etc.
  Initial descriptors include hydrogen-bond donors, acceptors,
  octanol/water partition, topological polar surface area, molar
  refractivity, molecular weight, InChI, SMARTS, titles, Lipinski
  Rule of Five, etc.
- A new "filter" plugin framework for selecting molecules by title,
  molecular weight, etc.
- Facility to add new "ops", commandline options or operations on the
  conversion process as plugin code.
  Initial operations include 3D coordinate generation, tautomer
  standarization, and addition of polar hydrogens.
- Code for integrating Open Babel and the BOOST graph library.
- Improved scripting support, including new bindings for C# and
  improved Java, Ruby, Python, and Perl bindings.
- Space group support and thoroughly revised and improved CIF format.
- Initial support for 3D point group symmetry perception.
- Improved support for "grids" or "cubes" of molecular data, such as
  from quantum mechanics programs. (See below for supported file
  formats.)
- Initial support for reading trajectories and animations.
- Improved support for reaction formats, including CML, RXN, and
  Reaction SMILES.
- Improved residue handling in PDB and Mol2 formats.
- Improved pH-dependent hydrogen addition.
- Latest released version of the InChI library, including use of the
    latest "preferred" options for InChI generation.
- Support for the cross-platform CMake build system.
- File format modules are now installed in a version-specific
    directory on unix, preventing problems between 2.2.x and 2.1.x (or
    older) plugin libraries.
- Framework to support "aliases" for group abbreviations, partially
    implemented for MDL formats.
- Many more bug fixes and small feature improvements.

New File Formats
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Import & Export:
 Chemkin
 Gaussian Cube
 Gaussian Z-matrix
 GROMACS xtc trajectories
 MCDL
 mmCIF
 OpenDX cube (e.g., from APBS)
 Reaction SMILES
Import only:
 Accelrys/MSI Cerius II MSI text format
 ADF output
 ADF Tape41 ASCII data
 GAMESS-UK input and output
 Molden structure
 PNG (for embedded chemical data)
 PQR
Export only:
 MSMS input
 ADF input
 InChI Keys
